docs: :memo: Sprout's output files and structure (#554)
seedcase-project/seedcase-sprout: docs/design/outputs.qmd

---
title: "Outputs"
---

{{< include /docs/includes/_wip.qmd >}}

Sprout is designed to structure, organize, and store data in a
standardized, coherent, and consistent way. At the base of how data is
structured and stored are the files and folders. So this document
describes the main file and folder structure output when using Sprout.
It is split into two sections: the file system when used either locally
or via the code-based way (through Python or the command line) in a user-controlled and terminal-only server, or when
used as a web app on a server.

## Local file and folder structure

We follow our [naming scheme](naming.qmd), as well as the [Frictionless
Data
specification](https://decisions.seedcase-project.org/why-frictionless-data/),
to decide on the structure and name of the files and folders. All data
stored in Sprout for a specific set of conditions is called a data
package and each set of data within the data package is called a data
resource.

::: callout-note
When a user starts using Sprout to structure their data, that data will

> form a Data Package (from the Frictionless Data standard). A data

Author: Only when we formally refer to the website and specification, otherwise no.

package is called many things in other fields, for instance it could be
a "cohort study data", a "data resource", a database, clinical trial
dataset, a dataset, a study dataset, simply "data", or any other combination
of words that include the word data. To keep it
consistent with the Frictionless Data standard, we name it a data
package.

> A data package is one or more files (called data resources) that contain

Author: Yes, eventually when we've agreed with things here, we'll put things into a glossary.

data specific to a given set of conditions. For instance, a data package
could be a research study that collects information from people older
than 50 who live in Denmark and who have diabetes. In this example data
package, there might be data collected on basic demographics like
gender, ethnicity, or education, or on blood sample data like blood
glucose, cholesterol, or blood pressure. Here, the basic demographics
could be one data resource, while the blood sample data could be another
data resource within the data package.
:::

### Folders

The folders that Sprout creates and uses are:

`SPROUT_ROOT/`

:   The location where Sprout will store all data that form one or more
    data packages. This location can be changed depending on the needs
    of the users. The default location is determined based on the
    operating system and where Sprout is installed locally by a user or on a

>     server by an IT admin. An example default location for a local

Author: ```suggestion
    server. An example default location for a local
```

>     server by an IT admin. An example default location for a local

Author: Hmm, no, since core or the CLI can still be installed or used on a server. I've slightly modified it though, since I understand what you are saying.

    computer, where Sprout is installed on a user's drive, would be
    `/home/USERNAME/.sprout/`.

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/`

:   All data packages are stored in the `packages/` folder and given an

>     `<id>` (likely a number or some unique combination of characters).

Author: Yea, just thinking about whether generating a random number might work better or be easier to assess. But for now, it is a number.

>     `<id>` (likely a number or some unique combination of characters).

Reviewer: If we have decided on using a number, maybe the "or some unique combination of characters" should be removed? 
```suggestion
    `<id>` (a whole number).
```

    Each `<id>` folder contains all the files relevant for **one** data
    package.

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/`

:   Whenever a specific type of data is stored in the data package, it
    will be stored as a data resource. In general, a data resource
    encompasses data collected in a specific way and for a specific set
    of measurements from a specific set of input sources for a specific
    purpose. The data resource(s) will always be within one specific

>     package, with each data resource in its own folder, e.g. `packages/1/resources/1/`.

Author: ```suggestion
    package, with each data resource in its own folder based on a number `<id>`, e.g. `packages/1/resources/1/`.
```

    rather than a single, joint data resource, is because, while
    they both collect data on the same group of people, they collect the
    data in different ways. The demographic data is usually collected
    with a survey by a researcher or technician (or the participant
    themselves if online) and obtained in a relatively consistent way using
    some survey software. Meanwhile, the blood sample data is usually
    taken at a specific time and analyzed by a specific machine by a
    specific laboratory in a specific way that is output in a specific
    format. The two types of data are collected in different ways and should be recognized
    as separate entities and thus separate data resources.

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/raw/`

:   Whenever data is stored and structured for a specific data resource,
    the original unprocessed and untouched data will be kept in this
    `raw/` folder as a backup and in case anything happens during the
    import stage. Given how messy data often is and given how some data
    storage formats (e.g. Excel) often have their own way of storing and
    encoding information, computer mistakes can happen that are not

>     caused by any human error (aside from the choice of storage format).

Author: Yup, that's right 😛 maybe a bit too cheeky haha I'll remove it.

>     caused by any human error (aside from the choice of storage format).

Author: ```suggestion
    caused by any human error.
```

    The data in the `raw/` folder can potentially be used to determine

>     where things went wrong if they did go wrong.

Author: Yea, exactly. A user can look directly at the data if they install it locally/have full control of a servers files via a terminal.

### Files

Sprout creates and uses these files:

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/datapackage.json`

:   This machine-readable JSON file is the foundation of a data package

>     and contains the full Frictionless Data specification. This file

Author: I wouldn't normally consider it necessary since we link to it at the top, but it might be useful if someone is using this as mostly a reference.

>     and contains the full Frictionless Data specification. This file

Author: ```suggestion
    and contains the full [Frictionless Data specification](https://datapackage.org/). This file
```

    contains the metadata on the package (like name and description) as
    well as metadata on the data resources (like column names, data
    types, and descriptions).

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/README.md`

:   Since JSON isn't easy for a human to read, this `README.md` file
    will contain some basic information from the `datapackage.json` file
    that is structured in a human readable, auto-generated way. This
    file is largely used to a) adhere to interoperable principles and b)
    serve potentially as the basis for displaying information for a
    data package's landing page in the Sprout web app.

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/database.sqlite`

:   This file contains all the data in the data package as a
    [SQLite](https://decisions.seedcase-project.org/why-sqlite/)

>     database. Each relational table within represents one data resource.

Author: Not at all. For the web app, we'll definitely use Postgres. Or at least, that's still the idea. And yea, there's an issue to make that post 😛

    The SQLite database is used because it is a lightweight, serverless,
    and self-contained database that is easy to use and manage. It is
    also a common database format that is used in many applications and

>     is easy to export to other database formats. The file is only

Author: I only included this explanation for you all to understand things. I won't remove this yet, only until I/we make the decision post on it.

The file is the SQLite database. Unfortunately, Data Package spec doesn't allow table links in the `path` argument.

>     is easy to export to other database formats. The file is only

Reviewer: Makes sense 👍 
So the SQLite file *will* be described within the "datapackage.json` file? At least according to L135-136 ("The file is only described within the `datapackage.json` file [...]"?
I thought we would link to the Parquet in the properties file?

>     is easy to export to other database formats. The file is only

Author: Depending on the result of the discussions, this might not be relevant. But to answer the question, we'd have to describe the database some way so people reading the `datapackage.json` file can determine the reason and use for the database. But it would probably be described in a custom field.

    described within the `datapackage.json` file and is not classified

>     as a data resource so can not be used by software following the

Reviewer 2: It's a bit ambiguous to me how the "following..." phrase fits in. Does it qualify "software" or the sentence as a whole?

    Frictionless Data standard. We use and provide it because of the
    features that formal databases provide, like indexing, querying, and
    data integrity. The `data.parquet` file described below will be the

>     data resource that is linked within the `datapackage.json` file.

Author: Hmm, the explanation is right above in this paragraph. Could you expand on what is unclear from the text above?

>     data resource that is linked within the `datapackage.json` file.

Reviewer: Yesssss. (sorry, if this is totally besides the point, but sometimes I just need to keep asking whatever questions pop up to make sure I understand why we choose to do what we do 🌱 )  
So, the explanation above made me think about whether we need the database bc:
1) We could use the Parquet file for indexing and querying, right? 
2. And we'll probably use the Frictionless Standard (`frictionless-py`) for data integrity checks?

>     data resource that is linked within the `datapackage.json` file.

Author: Hmmmm, I guess we could use duckdb to read in the Parquet files so that we can still make use of some SQL capabilities without needing to keep an extra file around... 🤔

>     data resource that is linked within the `datapackage.json` file.

Author: I made an issue to discuss this #581 so I will resolve this and merge in what has been added.

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/raw/<timestamp>-<uuid>.<extension>.gzip`

:   These are compressed raw data files associated with a specific
    resource. These files are kept intentionally raw and are copied
    directly from the input data the user provides to this file. This
    `raw/` folder will not be linked within the `datapackage.json` file.
    Every time a user adds or updates data to the data resource, the
    original file will be stored here before being processed for
    correctness and basic checks. Afterwards, it will be merged in with
    any existing data in the data resource's `data.parquet` file (for

>     tabular data).

Author: Yup, forget about it for now 😛 Data Package allows for different types of data, like images, etc. But that's for later, not now!

`SPROUT_ROOT/packages/<id>/resources/<id>/data.parquet`

:   When a user creates a data resource and adds or updates data in the

>     resource, it is processed and stored as a

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    resource, all resource data is processed and stored in
```

    [Parquet](https://decisions.seedcase-project.org/why-parquet/) data
    format (if it is tabular data). The reason there is both a Parquet

>     file as well as the table in the SQLite database is because of the

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    file as well as a table in the SQLite database is the
```
to match "a Parquet file"

>     way the data package specification describes and sets data

Author: Do we need the link everywhere in the doc? I'll add it for now, just feel its a bit excess to keep linking to it.

>     way the data package specification describes and sets data

Author: ```suggestion
    way the [Frictionless Data Package](https://datapackage.org/) specification describes and sets data
```

    resources. The specification requires either a path value or a data
    value to set as a data resource, but does not allow for setting a
    table in a database as a value. So interoperability of the data

>     package occurs by providing the Parquet file, rather than the SQLite

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    package is achieved by providing the Parquet file, rather than the SQLite
```

>     database. We use both the Parquet data file and the data in the
>     table of the database for different reasons, even though they are

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
    database. We use both the Parquet data file and the database
    table for different reasons, even though they contain
```

>     database. We use both the Parquet data file and the database
>     table for different reasons, even though they contain
>     the same data.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    database. In this way, we use both the Parquet data file and the database
    table for different reasons, even though they contain
    the same data.
```
